August 30, 1999, sitting in the garden room on Shady Drive of John Griffiths, getting ready to chat with him about his A&M experiences.
And John, use yours, say a phrase or a word.
Well, good morning.
It's nice to have you in our home, Haskell.
And, well, I'm ready to be interviewed as you wish.
John, would you begin by giving a brief biographical sketch of your experiences before you came to A&M?
Where did you grow up and go to school and where did you serve before A&M?
Well, I was born in 1926 in London.
That's the English one, not that upstart in Canada or not even the one in Texas.
And I lived in that region
going to school and going to London University.
It was, as anyone can calculate, the time during the war.
I remained in England, remained in London all that time, so had some very interesting experiences that I think has helped to mould my life.
And then eventually, at the end of the educational period,
I joined what was then called the Colonial, being British, Scientific Civil Service.
And in fact I was the first one they recruited.
The idea of that was to have a specialist in many, many different fields who could be sent to the various colonies when problems in that discipline occurred.
By the time they really got around to this, because it was first mooted in the mid-30s and then the war came along, we didn't have any colonies left.
But I started out by working with the people trying to survey and control the desert locust, an insect that can cover
about 11 million square miles ranging from West Africa to the Indian subcontinent and had some very interesting experiences there in Ethiopia, Eritrea, the Arabian Peninsula and so on.
And then when the locust plague at that time died out, I transferred and took some courses in veterinary science in order to work with the East African Veterinary Research Organisation, located just outside Nairobi, Kenya, and investigate the climatic stress on animals and similar studies.
Then I was asked to take charge of meteorological research in East Africa which then comprised Uganda, Kenya, Tanganyika as it was and Zanzibar and there I stayed for a few years
I had the opportunity to get awarded a Rockefeller Fellowship to come and travel in the United States in 1959 and 60, mainly 60, and visit centres of my own choosing.
And one of the main ones was Texas A&M because a gentleman there in the meteorological department, or it was oceanography I met then, of course, Dr. Halstead, was doing some work in a field that interested me.
Ironically, when I arrived here, he had already left.
I never met him.
He has since died, so I understand.
And yet, basically, he changed my whole life because three of the universities that I visited in California, Ames, Iowa, and A&M, then subsequently, when I got back to Africa, they wrote and offered me a position.
I had been taken by Texas A&M, and I thought it had great potential then.
It only had 7,000 students.
and Oceanography and Meteorology were bringing in quite a lot of research money for the whole of the Texas A&M College then, and I enjoyed the people whom I'd met there very much.
and in the department and in other soil and crop sciences, forestry, and so on.
And I decided to make the change.
And I said to my wife, well, I expect we'll be here three or four years, and 38 years later, here we still are.
But being a meteorologist, you'll forgive me for poor forecasts.
I don't know whether in the terminology of your undergraduate days,
there was a major.
What was your undergraduate major called?
My undergraduate major was called
special mathematics in which I was later fortunate enough to get a first-class honours with distinction and at the same time I took courses that enabled me to have a special diploma I suppose one could call it in theology which has always been an interest of mine and then I followed it up by
changing colleges within the university and took physics and statistics and of course meteorology.
And part of what you worked on in Africa with the locusts, a biologist could have claimed, couldn't he?
Yes and I was sort of responsible for taking measurements, observations, general comments and so on of the atmospheric part of the environment and how these affected the locus themselves and so we would
take the body temperatures of the locusts because they change color from green to black and when they get black they get more gregarious and that starts off the swarms and of course you have to have the rain for the eggs to become viable they lay a part of about 200 eggs when there's not much moisture up come the hoppers as they're called look around there's no vegetation very much at all
nothing to eat, they're mainly in desert regions, and so they wait for the next hoppers to come up and they eat those.
So that keeps the population down.
But when they get caught in what we call the intertropical convergence zone that moves with the solar movements,
and that brings rain as well, helps trigger rain and so there's vegetation, everybody's happy, they're eating away and they're not eating each other and these swarms begin to start and then they get enough temperature, heat worked up being insects and they're cold-blooded and they start flying around and meet other groups and so we get swarms covering thousands of square miles
You said you came first to A&M to visit in 1959?
Actually, I arrived here in April of 1960.
60.
Yes.
And where had you heard about A&M?
Was it word of mouth or printed?
It was reading various articles in the subject we call sort of micrometeorology, small scale.
because I've always been interested I didn't want to get into forecasting I wasn't too keen on that I like the applied of being certain practical aspects that people in other disciplines could use and although we are not too good at forecasting I always felt that we knew enough
about the small scale variations in the weather and the climate to be able to help people in agriculture, architecture, entomology, you name it.
Who were the, as far as you were aware before you got here, who were the key A&M faculty members in meteorology?
Dr Leeper was trained as a meteorologist and he came here in 1949 started the Department of Oceanography then of course I've always had the greatest respect for Bob Reed who came in 1951 who was very well versed in meteorology and in fact he
supervised, chaired a number of the earlier PhDs in meteorology.
Then also in that field, a little tangential, but were this Holstead and Bill Clayton.
All right.
Describe that first visit.
How did you get here?
What did you see?
So forth.
Well, when I first came,
Of course I landed in New York.
I flew in about a 14-hour flight in those days and spent a very icy first week because by then it was at the turn of the year, December and January, up in New York.
because I had to check in with the Rockefeller Foundation and the Munitalp Foundation who had also helped fund me.
Munitalp being a sort of anagram, a backward anagram of platinum for people who had made some money in that metal.
And in New York I bought a car by the
help of a friend of a friend that I knew in East Africa and so I drove around went down to Washington to pay my respects to the Weather Bureau as it was then and then drove further down visiting institutions especially in Florida and so on where they were doing work in atmospheric effects on plants and animals and so on then I drove across
through Louisiana, came into the Piney Woods and landed up at Texas A&M where I was made very welcome.
I remember I was assisted in finding a sort of efficiency place at a motel halfway between College Station and Bryan.
At that time you could tell that there was a difference between two cities.
There was a grassy area
And I remember extremely well that the cost for that motel with its efficiency and all that one really needed was $17.50 per week.
And it was in easy striking distance.
I could drive the car into A&M, no problems in parking.
And one of the most intriguing
memories that I have of this, I think, was that after writing a number of postcards and so on, I asked Dr. Lieber, where can I go to to mail these?
Of course I said post these, being British, and so he told me, and it was only about 150 yards away, to the Northgate Post Office, and that journey took me about 45 minutes, because
Every few yards I was stopped by somebody saying, I'm Fish Smith, sir, from Paducah or wherever, Dallhart, which meant nothing to me at that time, and they were terribly friendly, but I almost forgot where I was going.
But it really did make an impression on me, and that...
camaraderie has really still persisted and I found of course that it was typical of the whole of Texas basically and I have to say that this was one of the main reasons why I returned here was the friendliness.
Another reason of course was
being offered a job and Africa at that time was becoming a location in which it was clear there was no future for the likes of ourselves.
My wife was teaching at the university at the time.
We met in East Africa actually and after I got back from the visit to the USA and my wife was in some sort of trepidation because
her contact with Texas was to see the film Giant, and so the first question she said, are there any trees there?
And, of course, we know the answer to that, and now we have settled in very much.
We were located, of course, in Goodwin Hall at that time.
Describe the department and its facilities.
The department I think was in an enviable position at that time because I mentioned earlier that it had much of the research funding which allowed it a bit of flexibility and as I understand it reading and asking more questions about the situation
the fiscal situation in the earlier years, let me say the 1950s, which would basically cover the whole period because we didn't start until 49, and I came in 60 and then permanently in 62, was that they juggled the funding to bring in people to teach whilst also really getting most of their salary, if not all, from the research.
And this of course, the two go hand in hand and when a department is starting up with fundamentally outside sponsored research, I mean the agricultural engineering still had their Texas money coming in and some federal, this was about the only way that it could be done.
And so it had really got on its feet.
Meteorology came under one of the branches of oceanography, meteorological oceanography and there was biological and physical and chemical as well and with their sort of section heads and we met for seminars once a week and I was invited a couple of times to speak to these and as I say
Everybody within the department was so welcoming and around campus, very hospitable.
The facilities were basic one would say, but I think they were improvement over what they had had in the very earliest days.
But there was sufficient space and all that one needed.
And of course, at the time, the most, the major component of the student body was the Air Force.
Because in the mid-50s, I think it was that they, I'm just checking a date here,
We had the basics students, as they were called, and they came in from the Air Force, the first class was in 1953, for one year.
They had degrees in some subject, not necessarily even in a science type of subject, and they in one year got what was called the basic training for meteorologists to go out and actually forecast.
And this has been a very strong part
of the Department of Meteorology all the way through.
It has become limited now, we have many more civilian students than military but we still have a component of these and we have just started again recently, I think it was last year, to have a new basics class.
Now I think they came in this summer
and so there's about four or five of them at this stage.
So this was interesting to be in an environment where most of the students were wearing uniforms on one day of the week,
And that was something new to me.
And I think also what interested me was the range of courses that were being taught within the department.
And although, as I mentioned, I'd been offered jobs elsewhere, these universities did not, or those campuses, did not have a department of meteorology.
and I felt that since my graduate training was in meteorology I would perhaps get to push to one side and I have seen with other examples that this is very often true and one of the reasons why I decided well I'd come to the oceanography and meteorology department as it was then
meteorology getting a strengthening program through the mid-50s and in 1956 became the Department of Oceanography and Meteorology.
And so we had a separate section and by the time I came back in 1962, Dr. Vance Moyer was then the section head.
As you, after that first visit, as you now understand it, what process took place in the department before they made you a formal offer of a faculty appointment?
As I have gleaned it, that's all, because I wasn't privy to this or wasn't here at the time even, it was a case of Dr. Leeper,
who was a very kind fellow and he was
he knew that he wanted to build up his department and he spoke with the meteorology section faculty as to whether they thought I should be made an offer and they didn't have anybody at that time who was responsible for teaching climatology or the statistical concepts of it and that was one that I had
I had also taken a diploma in statistics, and evidently everybody agreed, and so they made an offer, and... Was this verbal or written?
I did get a written letter, that was all, from Dr. Leeper, and saying that this would be the salary, I think it was the assistant professor, $9,000 a year.
I'm assuming a 12-month appointment.
Well, I had the good fortune whilst over here on the Rockefeller Fellowship to meet a lot of people who were very well known in the climatology and applied climatology, which we often call bio-climatology.
field including a meeting at the Pentagon with a number of people who were dealing with the effects of the atmosphere on the military and materiel and all this sort of thing and after that meeting a couple of them kept in touch with me and asked if I was interested in submitting a research proposal to
collate and analyze data for certain parts of the world with the military in mind and I said yes
I was and they said well you know this could be arranged even though you're overseas it would not have been so easy of course but this was later in the fullness of time after about a year 18 months or so about 18 months was awarded so that I was able to come over here with a research program
in operation as soon as I hit the floor sort of thing and so of course it was a nine month appointment and the research would support me for the other three months so that in a way I was cushioned for this.
Because I have always found it a bit incongruous, I think, that people on a nine-month appointment or less than 12 months do not earn vacation time.
so they earned sick leave which of course is justifiable but I also think that the other should be awarded but there you are it wasn't the case and it isn't the case and so I was fortunate right from the beginning to be on what's effectively a 12-month appointment.
Now you began as a faculty member in
62 I came here in August 62 all right describe and your wife came with you she came about three or four weeks later because I had to go with one of the faculty members then who became very good friend a dear friend who died a few years ago Professor Henry and he and I went down to Central America
in order to try to track down data that will be relevant for the research.
Describe, you and your wife, your location of housing for you when she arrived.
Well, I had seen, when coming in 1960, driving around, what I thought were just standard apartments.
So I said to her, well, we'll be able to get an apartment while we were, of course we called it a flat, being from England, and then we'll look for a house.
Well, of course it transpired that I had made a mistake.
I was looking at the student housing,
the old student housing there almost now University Drive and I think I'm approximately correct which is the best any meteorologist can do there was just about one block of apartment down towards Bryan at that time and so I was really more or less forced into looking around for housing and with the advice of people around in the department I was shown
number of houses because it was not long after the Bryan Air Force Base had closed so there'd been a bit of an exodus and there were homes on the market but they'd either remained vacant for a few years or had been rented short-time rentals to people so they were not in the best condition but eventually I found one to
my liking and the liking of my purse at the time on Winding Road and decided that was it and then spent the next three weeks in great trepidation thinking, I hope Joan likes this.
Oh dear, this is our first home.
What have I done?
I've committed myself.
But she did settle into it very well and we enjoyed our time there.
How did the two of you feel you were received by the local community?
Oh, very well indeed.
I think they sort of adopted us as a sort of Texas Limeys.
Very friendly indeed and would say, well, I like your accent and...
I think there were times when, of course, they didn't understand us.
And, well, we knew that was the case because one of the things that we both like is buttermilk.
And we were going to a restaurant and asked for buttermilk and they would say warm milk or anything.
And I said, no, buttermilk.
And then they would say, oh, buttermilk.
Yes, yes, buttermilk.
So we got to learn how to say buttermilk.
And just little things like that which were very humorous, really.
We used to, because of the way of shopping in Europe, make a pilgrimage on Friday after five o'clock.
times were very strict then you worked from 8 until 5 and not 10 minutes to 5 and we would drive out to the big metropolis of Snook where there was Lawrence Grocery and we could buy fresh meats and nice cheeses off the wheel and so on and this was quite a little safari into the countryside we might even stop for some kolaches
Describe your first duties.
What classes did you teach and what research did you begin as you joined the faculty?
I'll start with the research because I've already just mentioned it and that was this obtaining of an analysis of data mainly rainfall precipitation from Central America
in order to find out the likelihood of heavy rains, distribution of the rainfalls, peculiar situations that they had with regards to weather systems and so on.
So that took care of the research.
Then I developed
course in statistical meteorology I've always been a believer that whilst I know that statistics is wide-ranging in science that it helps people if examples of
are brought out for their own discipline and so we tried to avoid that terrible word at the time duplication of courses and so that was one course then I had to develop and reorganize courses in what we would call physical and regional climatology
everyone being expected no matter what their research was and so on I'm sure you found this the same you taught three or four courses per semester a three course semester was a light load at the time and so that that kept us busy because of course in between was we had to do some traveling to go down and get these data when we
got clues as to where it may exist and although this wasn't in the first year but after about three or four years just to quote an example down in Bolivia I was getting almost nowhere in trying to get data they had no organized meteorological service as such it had come and gone with the revolutions
and I was in the second biggest city there, Cochabamba, and I'd gone to an engineering firm because I'd heard that they had a network of stations.
So I sent a card in and the secretary ushered me in to see the director of this company, and he looked up, smiled,
took off a ring, put it in front of me and said, do you recognize that?
And he goes without saying, it was an Aggie ring.
And from then on, everything went smoothly.
I think we got as many of the data as we possibly could have hoped.
And it was right by the skin of one's teeth, as they say, because I was literally walking up the steps of the aeroplane.
None of these tunnels to get onto them.
In those days, you walked half a mile across a hot runway.
when a young man came running out with a great pile of papers and handed them over to me, and those were the data.
So we had some very pleasant experiences, but that tied in with the research aspect.
Surely you have some good anecdotes about a person with a fine English accent teaching Texans.
There must have been some good stories from class.
Well, one of the main ones that kept occurring was my problem with trying to get around some of the names and their pronunciations.